README.md, before:

# MountainCircles
MountainCircles is an algorithm that generates contour lines of the glide cones around landable places in the mountains.
Inputs are:
- a list of landable places
- glide ratio
- circuit height
- ground clearance (useful when a pass is a keypoint to glide to the landing, to have some margin to make sure we make it)

### Origin
- This project is the continuation of a project that ended up in early 2024 with this interactive map covering the full Alps (different information at different zoom levels):
https://live.glidernet.org/#c=45.26242,7.67261&z=7&m=4&s=1

![mountain circles map](images/ogn.jpg)

you can still download the "alpes 600dpi 2.mbtiles" at https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1fr68iDfBMsFurlEx9bBe8ZorvOEG9Lc7?usp=sharing and share this file on your phone with Guru Maps, a free android and iphone app that allows custom map import in MBTiles format. 
That map has the following parameters:
- glide ratio : 20
- ground clearance: 200m
- circuit height: 250m

The objective has now shifted to providing a way to quickly compute a file to display, with everyone its own glide parameters, and eveyone its own list of airfields.

# Today
for quicker export, we just have vector layers that we can switch on and off in Guru Maps:

![guru map](images/gm.jpg)

## How to download
## from your phone:
- install Guru Maps
- go to https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1nf3-rh1FVG5X43KMUsyvlxcQL0Tnapjj?usp=drive_link
- find the layers you want (f20 - gas0 - s250 means glide ratio 20, ground clearance 0m, circuit height 250m) [*west alps has both fields and outlanding fields*]
- for any layer, download both **the geojson** (the data) **+ the mapcss** (the style)
- share the files with Guru Maps previously installed  (go to your files explorer application -download folder- and select the files and share if needed)
- in Guru Maps, the files should be found in the overlay section, which means you can choose the background layer that you want.
- i also suggest adding "google maps terrain HD" background. --> https://ms.gurumaps.app/ -->share the downloaded file with guru maps

## from your mac
- in the app store, on apple silicon, the app is available, the font a little small though.
- could be available on windows too, to be checked

### Notes on the peaks and passes layers
- the peaks are a decluttered version of the OSM database, designed to keep only the highest one 5km around
- the passes were computed to be "all the key points to glide back to an airfield, with L/D 20, 25, 30"

## How to use
### !! The pictures are with glide parameters L/D 25, ground clearance 0, circuit height 250m !!
- the calculated path back to the landing is always going towards the center of the arcs of circles
- here at 2600m the way back to Albertville is not the same depending on which side of the valley we are
- **the way north goes through a pass, it is actually a flat pass, it would be good to use at least 100m ground clearance instead of 0**
![back_to_albertville.png](images/back_to_albertville.png)
- we might be interested in finding the point at which we switch from one airfield to the next one, and know the minimum altitude at that point
- here, **with no ground clearance over a flat pass to the south** it would be at Saint-laurent du pont at 1600m
![between_challes_and_versoud.png](images/between_challes_and_versoud.png)
- or we might want to know which are the escapes from the rhone valley to the rhine valley
- here we see that the jump from rhone to rhine necessitates at least 2600m (actually 2700m if we add 100m of ground clearance over the passes), and the high rhine valley neccesitates at least 2900m to be on reach of bad ragaz
![from_munster_to_bad_ragaz.png](images/from_munster_to_bad_ragaz.png)
- I should really publish calculations with ground clearance of 100m



# If you want to contribute, or run the code yourself to choose you own airfields and glide parameters:

### Requirements to make this work so far:

- build C++ files (see below)
- create a conda environnement with the latest python, activate it, and run:
- ``` conda install conda-forge::pyyaml```
- ``` conda install conda-forge::pyproj```
- ``` conda install conda-forge::numpy```
- ``` conda install conda-forge::gdal```
- add https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-VK5xH8YsDiYMH_TTw0kfHIHoiT12Jh2/view?usp=sharing in the topography folder

- check the file pathes in the yaml configuration files 
- ```reset_results: true``` starts by deleting the results of the previous run you launched with this config
- start with albertville.yaml for just one airfield, then three.yaml is... 3 airfields.. yeah you got it


``` 
python launch.py [config].yaml
 ```


### Compiling C++ on mac with VSCode
- check or install xcode
- open vscode -> open folder ->C++ to build
- open compute.cpp, agree to install C++ extension..
- from the main folder, run ```g++ -std=c++11 -o compute.exe cpp/*.cpp cpp/data/*.cpp cpp/io/*.cpp```

### Compiling C++ in windows with VSCode (feedback needed)
- As a mac user, through a windows 11 virtual machine, vscode couldn't build the C++ as is. 
- I followed the recommendations to install visual studio build tools. windows had to restart to complete installation. 
- **-->Then do not launch VSCode from the desktop shortcut<--** 
- Do Windows -> search for "Developer Command Prompt for VS", type in ```cl``` to make sure it is installed and responding, you should see a version number, and not an error. 
- Then navigate in command line to the folder where you have cloned the repository, do ```code .```, and now VSCode has access to the C++ build tools and will offer them to you.
- open compute.cpp, agree to install C++ extension..
- from the main folder, run ```g++ -std=c++11 -o compute.exe cpp/*.cpp cpp/data/*.cpp cpp/io/*.cpp```


# Usage

### A run with several airfields will provide:
- a "local" calculation for each individual airfield as "local.asc" (topology of the local) and "airfieldName.gpkg" (the contour lines).
- a recombined topology for all the airfields, and its contour lines, as .asc and .gpkg in the root folder of the calculation results.
- all in the Coordinate Reference System specified in the yaml config file

### With ```gurumaps: true``` in the yaml config file, it will provide as well:
- a geojson conversion of the contour lines for all output, in the right CRS for Guru Maps (EPSG:4326)
- a .mapcss style file of the same name
- names ending with _airfields also have airfields to display

### .mapcss styles
- found in /templates
- they are copied alongside each geojson, named identically, after calculations, for quicker export
- Guru Maps docs: https://gurumaps.app/docs/mapcss
- when playing with the styles, i found out that using android studio's emulator was quicker than exporting to real phone. Some mapcss crashed the app consistently -> clear all app data, or uninstall/reinstall


# to do next

- get the missing eastern bit of the alp
- see if polygon export is viable in the geojson to color the map for each airfield
- add the ability to choose individual glide/ground clearance/circuit height for each airfield
- long term: make a self contained executable
- add airspace. we could start with airspace connected to the ground (P areas, national/regional parks)


# Disclaimer:

this is unchecked amateur work, altitudes could be wrong, find a way to check that you are happy with the results if you fly with it.

# Credits
https://github.com/planeur-net/outlanding for the west alps cup file

Commit message:

changed folder managment for quick export to google drive

README.md, after:

# MountainCircles
MountainCircles is an algorithm that generates contour lines of the glide cones around landable places in the mountains.
Inputs are:
- a list of landable places
- glide ratio
- circuit height
- ground clearance (useful when a pass is a keypoint to glide to the landing, to have some margin to make sure we make it)

### Origin
- This project is the continuation of a project that ended up in early 2024 with this interactive map covering the full Alps (different information at different zoom levels):
https://live.glidernet.org/#c=45.26242,7.67261&z=7&m=4&s=1

![mountain circles map](images/ogn.jpg)

you can still download the "alpes 600dpi 2.mbtiles" at https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1fr68iDfBMsFurlEx9bBe8ZorvOEG9Lc7?usp=sharing and share this file on your phone with Guru Maps, a free android and iphone app that allows custom map import in MBTiles format. 
That map has the following parameters:
- glide ratio : 20
- ground clearance: 200m
- circuit height: 250m

The objective has now shifted to providing a way to quickly compute a file to display, with everyone its own glide parameters, and eveyone its own list of airfields.

# Today
for quicker export, we just have vector layers that we can switch on and off in Guru Maps:

![guru map](images/gm.jpg)

## How to download
## from your phone:
- install Guru Maps
- install a nice free offline map background
- Option 1: adding "google maps terrain HD" background. --> https://ms.gurumaps.app/ -->share the downloaded file with guru maps
- Option 2: https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1ApDTSuf8jsdpCH97JeU6T_NIGHr8ZFPG?usp=sharing download, share with guru maps as above

- go to https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1nf3-rh1FVG5X43KMUsyvlxcQL0Tnapjj?usp=drive_link
- find the folder corresponding to the parameters you want ("L/D 20-ground 100m-circuit 250m" for example - ground 100m means ground clearance 100m, so when the way back is over a pass, the calculation puts you on glide, here 20, for a point 100m above the pass.) 
- download everything (both **the geojson** (the data) **+ the mapcss** (the style)) in that folder.
- share the files with Guru Maps previously installed  (go to your files explorer application -download folder- and select the files and share if needed)
- in Guru Maps, the files should be found in the overlay section, which means you can choose the background layer that you want.
- the layer startng by "aa_" is the recombined file of all the individual airfields.
- You can superimpose the recombined version with an individual layer, or more, in guru maps


## from your mac
- in the app store, on apple silicon, the app is available, the font a little small though.
- could be available on windows too, to be checked

### Notes on the peaks and passes layers
- the peaks are a decluttered version of the OSM database, designed to keep only the highest one 5km around
- the passes were computed to be "all the key points to glide back to an airfield, with L/D 20, 25, 30"

## How to use
### !! The pictures are with glide parameters L/D 25, ground clearance 0, circuit height 250m !!
- the calculated path back to the landing is always going towards the center of the arcs of circles
- here at 2600m the way back to Albertville is not the same depending on which side of the valley we are
- **the way north goes through a pass, it is actually a flat pass, it would be good to use at least 100m ground clearance instead of 0**
![back_to_albertville.png](images/back_to_albertville.png)
- we might be interested in finding the point at which we switch from one airfield to the next one, and know the minimum altitude at that point
- here, **with no ground clearance over a flat pass to the south** it would be at Saint-laurent du pont at 1600m
![between_challes_and_versoud.png](images/between_challes_and_versoud.png)
- or we might want to know which are the escapes from the rhone valley to the rhine valley
- here we see that the jump from rhone to rhine necessitates at least 2600m (actually 2700m if we add 100m of ground clearance over the passes), and the high rhine valley neccesitates at least 2900m to be on reach of bad ragaz
![from_munster_to_bad_ragaz.png](images/from_munster_to_bad_ragaz.png)
- I should really publish calculations with ground clearance of 100m



# If you want to contribute, or run the code yourself to choose you own airfields and glide parameters:

### Requirements to make this work so far:

- build C++ files (see below)
- create a conda environnement with the latest python, activate it, and run:
- ``` conda install conda-forge::pyyaml```
- ``` conda install conda-forge::pyproj```
- ``` conda install conda-forge::numpy```
- ``` conda install conda-forge::gdal```
- add https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-VK5xH8YsDiYMH_TTw0kfHIHoiT12Jh2/view?usp=sharing in the topography folder

- check the file pathes in the yaml configuration files 
- ```reset_results: true``` starts by deleting the results of the previous run you launched with this config
- start with albertville.yaml for just one airfield, then three.yaml is... 3 airfields.. yeah you got it


``` 
python launch.py [config].yaml
 ```


### Compiling C++ on mac with VSCode
- check or install xcode
- open vscode -> open folder ->C++ to build
- open compute.cpp, agree to install C++ extension..
- from the main folder, run ```g++ -std=c++11 -o compute.exe cpp/*.cpp cpp/data/*.cpp cpp/io/*.cpp```

### Compiling C++ in windows with VSCode (feedback needed)
- As a mac user, through a windows 11 virtual machine, vscode couldn't build the C++ as is. 
- I followed the recommendations to install visual studio build tools. windows had to restart to complete installation. 
- **-->Then do not launch VSCode from the desktop shortcut<--** 
- Do Windows -> search for "Developer Command Prompt for VS", type in ```cl``` to make sure it is installed and responding, you should see a version number, and not an error. 
- Then navigate in command line to the folder where you have cloned the repository, do ```code .```, and now VSCode has access to the C++ build tools and will offer them to you.
- open compute.cpp, agree to install C++ extension..
- from the main folder, run ```g++ -std=c++11 -o compute.exe cpp/*.cpp cpp/data/*.cpp cpp/io/*.cpp```


# Usage

### A run with several airfields will provide:
- a "local" calculation for each individual airfield as "local.asc" (topology of the local) and "airfieldName.gpkg" (the contour lines).
- a recombined topology for all the airfields, and its contour lines, as .asc and .gpkg in the root folder of the calculation results.
- all in the Coordinate Reference System specified in the yaml config file

### With ```gurumaps: true``` in the yaml config file, it will provide as well:
- a geojson conversion of the contour lines for all output, in the right CRS for Guru Maps (EPSG:4326)
- a .mapcss style file of the same name
- names ending with _airfields also have airfields to display

### .mapcss styles
- found in /templates
- they are copied alongside each geojson, named identically, after calculations, for quicker export
- Guru Maps docs: https://gurumaps.app/docs/mapcss
- when playing with the styles, i found out that using android studio's emulator was quicker than exporting to real phone. Some mapcss crashed the app consistently -> clear all app data, or uninstall/reinstall


# to do next

- get the missing eastern bit of the alp
- see if polygon export is viable in the geojson to color the map for each airfield
- add the ability to choose individual glide/ground clearance/circuit height for each airfield
- long term: make a self contained executable
- add airspace. we could start with airspace connected to the ground (P areas, national/regional parks)


# Disclaimer:

this is unchecked amateur work, altitudes could be wrong, find a way to check that you are happy with the results if you fly with it.

# Credits
https://github.com/planeur-net/outlanding for the west alps cup file
